CityUHK Qingdao Research Institute  FINAL YEAR PROJECT REPORT  2025/26-Proposal Code  Text2GS: Text-Driven 3D Scene Generation via Progressive Multi-Stage Decoupling  Student Name: Zeng Jingwei Home University: Chongqing University Student ID: 2502005 Supervisor: Prof.Hou Junhui Assessor: Prof.Hou Junhui Date: 6 May 2026
Student Final Year Project Declaration  Solemn Declaration:   The submitted thesis (design) titled "Text2GS: Text-Driven 3D Scene Generation via Progressive Multi-Stage Decoupling" is the result of independent research con- ducted by me under the guidance of my supervisor. Except for the quoted content explicitly marked in the thesis (design), this thesis (design) does not contain works that have been pub- lished or written by other individuals or groups. Individuals and groups who have contributed to the research in this thesis have been clearly indicated in the text. I am fully aware of the legal consequences of this declaration and promise to bear all legal responsibilities arising from it.  Project Title: Text2GS: Text-Driven 3D Scene Generation via Progressive Multi-Stage Decou-pling  Student Name: Zeng Jingwei   Student ID:  Signature:   Date: 6 May 2026  2502005
No part of this report may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transcribed in any form or by any means – electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise – without the prior written permission of City University of Hong Kong and CityUHK Qingdao Research Institute.
Abstract  Text-driven 3D scene generation faces multiple coupled constraints in cross-dimensional map-  ping, including multi-view consistency, geometric reconstruction robustness, and generation  efficiency. Existing methods either rely on end-to-end optimization, leading to over-smoothing  and Janus artifacts, or adopt single-stage feed-forward generation that struggles to ensure global  consistency, lacking systematic research on the geometry-appearance decoupling process. This  paper presents   Text2GS , a generation framework based on progressive multi-stage decoupling  that decomposes the complex text-to-3D task into four controllable sub-tasks, establishing a  mixed information-passing mechanism between stages.  The core innovations include:   (1) Leveraging the correspondence-aware mechanism of  MVDiffusion to explicitly model geometric constraints between views during the diffusion  process, generating globally consistent 360 ◦   panoramic images; (2) Employing DUSt3R for  calibration-free dense point cloud reconstruction, decoupling geometry estimation from ap-  pearance generation to enhance reconstruction robustness; (3) Applying video diffusion   model  for sparse view interpolation, utilizing the temporal coherence of video gen- eration to  ensure smooth transitions between interpolated views. Experimental results demon- strate an  inherent trade-off between enhancing geometric completeness and preserving appear- ance  sharpness via progressive decoupling: view interpolation significantly reduces the LPIPS  perceptual distance by 16.35% ( p   <   0 . 001) and improves point cloud density by 67%, but  multi-view consistency shows no significant improvement ( p   =   0 . 627), and rendering qual-  ity decreases by 12.98% ( p   =   0 . 012). Furthermore, quantitative comparisons demonstrate that  compared to heavy-optimization baselines like DreamScene (which requires >40GB  VRAM and 64.4 minutes), Text2GS achieves a 5 . 6 ×   speedup (11.5 mins) and reduces peak  VRAM to 18.2GB, while achieving superior text-image alignment. These findings not only  reveal the bidi- rectional impact of dense view interpolation on 3D Gaussian Splatting  training but also prove that high-quality 3D scene generation can be democratized for  consumer-grade hardware.   The   source   code   is   publicly   available   at   https://github.com/  Flowow-zjw/Text2GS/tree/Final.  Keywords:   Text-to-3D Generation; Diffusion Models; Multi-view Consistency; Calibration-  free Reconstruction; 3D Gaussian Splatting  i
Acknowledgements  I would like to thank the authors of MVDiffusion, ViewCrafter, DUSt3R, and 3D Gaussian  Splatting for their open-source code, which provided a solid foundation for this research.   I  would also like to thank   Prof. Hou Junhui for their careful guidance in topic selection,  experimental design, and thesis writing.  ii
Contents  Abstract   i Acknowledgements   ii List of Figures   v List of Tables   vi 1   Introduction   1  1.1   Research Background and Significance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1 1.2   Current Status of Domestic and International Research   . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1 1.2.1   Text-Driven 3D Content Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1 1.2.2   Evolution of Generative Priors for Multi-View Consistency . . . . . . .   2 1.2.3   Compositional 3D Generation for Complex Scenes . . . . . . . . . . .   2 1.2.4   Scene Reconstruction Based on Neural Representations . . . . . . . . .   3 1.2.5   Systematic Limitations of Existing Research   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3 1.3   Main Research Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4 1.4   Thesis Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4  2   Theoretical and Technical Foundations   6  2.1   Generative Mechanism of Diffusion Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6 2.1.1   Theoretical Framework of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models . .   6 2.1.2   Correspondence-Aware Mechanism for Multi-View Consistency . . . .   6 2.1.3   Applicability Boundaries of Diffusion Models in 3D Generation . . . .   6 2.2   Algebraic Representation of Calibration-Free 3D Reconstruction . . . . . . . .   7 2.3   Temporal and Spatial Consistency Mapping Theory Based on Video Priors . . .   7 2.4   Information Passing Strategy in Progressive Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8 2.5   Shortcomings of Existing Combination Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8  3   Progressive Multi-Stage Decoupled 3D Scene Generation Method   9  3.1   System Architecture and Information Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9 3.2   Correspondence-Aware Generation of Panoramic Views . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9 3.2.1   Camera Parameterization in Spherical Coordinate System   . . . . . . .   9 3.2.2   Attention Mechanism for Cross-View Feature Alignment . . . . . . . .   9 3.3   Global Alignment Optimization for Point Cloud Reconstruction   . . . . . . . .   10 3.3.1   Confidence-Weighted Geometric Consistency Constraints   . . . . . . .   10 3.3.2   Minimum Spanning Tree Initialization Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10 3.3.3   Iterative Optimization and Convergence Criteria   . . . . . . . . . . . .   11 3.4   Temporal Diffusion Synthesis of Dense Views . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11 3.4.1   Point Cloud-Guided View Interpolation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11 3.4.2   Sampling Strategy with Keyframe Preservation   . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11 3.4.3   DUSt3R Reconstruction and Pose Refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12 3.5   Scene Representation and Optimization of Gaussian Splatting   . . . . . . . . .   13 3.5.1   COLMAP Format Export   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13 3.5.2   Gaussian Splatting Training Strategy   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13 3.6   Limitations of the Proposed Framework   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   13 iii
4   Experimental Design and Result Analysis   14  4.1   Experimental Environment and Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14 4.2   Evaluation Metrics System   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14 4.2.1   Core Evaluation Metrics   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14 4.2.2   Evaluation Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15 4.3   Ablation Study and Comparative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16 4.3.1   Causal Effect Analysis of Progressive Decoupling   . . . . . . . . . . .   16 4.3.2   Quality Evolution Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17 4.3.3   Failure Cases and Boundary Condition Analysis   . . . . . . . . . . . .   17 4.4   System Performance and Resource Overhead   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18 4.4.1   Memory Optimization Strategy   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18 4.4.2   Execution Time Breakdown   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18 4.4.3   FID Analysis   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18 4.5   Quantitative and Qualitative Comparison with SOTA Methods   . . . . . . . . .   18  5   Conclusions and Future Work   20  5.1   Main Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20 5.2   Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20  References   21 Appendices   24  iv
List of Figures  1   Example of Sparse View Reconstruction Artifacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3 2   Overall Process Flowchart of the Text2GS System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4 3   DUSt3R Point Cloud Reconstruction Process   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7 4   ViewCrafter Dense View Interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12 v
List of Tables  1   Results of Progressive Comparative Experiments   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16 2   Quality Evolution Comparison - Stage 1 Images vs. Rendered Images   . . . . .   17 3   Quantitative Comparison with DreamScene   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18 4   Qualitative Comparison with Existing Methods   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19 5   Prompt Complexity Classification Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25 6   Stage 1 (MVDiffusion) Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25 7   Stage 2 (DUSt3R) Parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26 8   Stage 3 (ViewCrafter) Parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26 9   Stage 4 (3D Gaussian Splatting) Parameters   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27 10   Hardware Requirements   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31 11   Memory Optimization Techniques   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   32 vi
1.   Introduction  1.1   Research Background and Significance  3D content generation is one of the core problems in computer graphics, with broad appli- cations in fields such as virtual reality, game development, and architectural design. Traditional 3D modeling relies on professional software and manual operations, which are costly and time- consuming. In recent years, breakthroughs in deep learning, particularly diffusion models, have provided a new paradigm for text-driven 3D generation [1, 2]. In particular, conditional diffu- sion models represented by ControlNet[28] have greatly enhanced the spatial controllability of content generation. However, the cross-dimensional mapping from 2D images to 3D scenes is inherently an ill-posed problem: a single-view image cannot uniquely determine 3D geometry, and multi-view generation faces the challenge of consistency constraints. Although early methods represented by DreamFusion have made breakthroughs in text- to-3D generation, existing paradigms encounter significant bottlenecks when evolving toward complex 3D scene generation. More critically, most current text-to-3D generation models (e.g., Magic3D, ProlificDreamer) focus primarily on object-centric generation.   When faced with real-world scenes containing multiple objects, complex spatial layouts, and borderless envi- ronments, they tend to produce severe geometric distortions, Janus (multi-face) artifacts, and over-smoothed textures. On the other hand, although feed-forward methods (such as Zero-1-to-3) attempt to achieve multi-view generation by fine-tuning diffusion models, the severe lack of information in unob- served regions under sparse input views makes existing neural rendering pipelines highly prone to structural holes and stretched ellipsoid artifacts (as seen in 3DGS) in under-sampled areas. How to simultaneously balance global multi-view consistency, local geometric robustness, and scene-level high-fidelity textures during the generation process has become an urgent prob- lem at the intersection of computer graphics and 3D vision. Based on this, this paper breaks away from the limitations of traditional end-to-end optimization and proposes a progressive multi-stage decoupled generation framework. It aims to systematically overcome the profound coupling between geometry and appearance in text-driven complex scene generation, providing empirical evidence and a system-level solution for efficient, high-quality 3D content creation.  1.2   Current Status of Domestic and International Research  1.2.1   Text-Driven 3D Content Generation  DreamFusion [3] first proposed the SDS loss... At almost the same time, Score Jacobian Chaining (SJC) [29] derived a similar 2D-3D distillation mechanism from the mathematical perspective of score matching. Subsequent works like Magic3D [4] and ProlificDreamer [5] improved generation quality through enhanced sampling strategies and regularization terms, but the optimization process of implicit fields still requires several hours.   To accelerate this process, recent works like GaussianDreamer[30] attempted to apply SDS optimization directly to explicit Gaussian primitives, effectively shortening generation time. Feed-forward methods like Zero-1-to-3 [6] and One-2-3-45 [7] achieved single-view to multi-view generation by fine- tuning diffusion models. In recent years, large reconstruction models based on Transformers, represented by LRM [21], and fast generation frameworks combining Gaussian Splatting, such as DreamGaussian [22], have greatly improved the speed and geometric quality of single-image- to-3D generation. However, due to view occlusions in a single image, their generalization ability 1
remains limited when dealing with complex structures.  1.2.2   Evolution of Generative Priors for Multi-View Consistency  Multi-view consistency is the core challenge in 3D generation. Early MVDream [8] was limited to object-level attention interaction. Furthermore, SyncDreamer [23] achieved implicit synchronization of multi-view features by constructing an epipolar cost volume, while Won- der3D [31] jointly generated multi-view color images and normal maps through Cross-Domain Diffusion, further enhancing local geometric consistency.   MVDiffusion [9] then took a step further by proposing Correspondence-Aware Attention (CAA) to explicitly model geometric epipolar constraints, laying the foundation for panoramic generation. Recently, academia pro- posed an important and ingenious paradigm shift: transforming spatial 3D multi-view consis- tency into temporal coherence in video generation (e.g., the application of Stable Video 3D [24] in multi-view orbital generation). Following this trend, 3DGS-Enhancer [15] and ViewCrafter [16] creatively utilized powerful pre-trained video diffusion models for sparse view interpola- tion and enhancement, compensating for missing information in unobserved 3D regions through temporally smooth features of video frames.   Concurrently, generation architectures are also evolving towards higher efficiency.   Methods like SplatFlow [17] introduced Rectified Flow models, aiming to achieve end-to-end feed-forward 3DGS decoding by straightening the sam- pling trajectories from data to noise; concurrent work like pixelSplat [32] also attempted to in- fer 3DGS directly in a feed-forward manner from sparse image pairs via epipolar self-attention mechanisms. Although end-to-end feed-forward models have extremely fast inference speeds, they still struggle to generalize to in-the-wild borderless complex scenes. Therefore, this paper combines video diffusion priors and multi-stage decoupling strategies to find a better balance between generalization capability and generation quality.  1.2.3   Compositional 3D Generation for Complex Scenes  With the maturity of single-object generation, research focus is gradually shifting to scene- level 3D generation. However, implicit NeRF or traditional 3DGS are prone to content drift and geometric distortion when representing complex interactive scenes. Recent studies have started introducing structured priors to constrain scene generation. For instance, methods like Set-the-scene and CompoNeRF combine multiple neural radiance fields through manually de- fined bounding boxes; works like GALA3D [18] introduce Large Language Models (LLMs) to extract spatial relationships from text to generate an initial layout, which then guides the geo- metrically adaptive distribution of 3D Gaussian primitives. In addition, academia has explored scene generation based on image outpainting, such as Text2Room [25], which progressively stitches complete indoor meshes using depth estimation and image inpainting; SceneDreamer [33] combines Bird’s-Eye View (BEV) representations with generative models to achieve infi- nite 3D scene roaming; and LucidDreamer [26] expands scenes through point cloud comple- tion. However, whether it is layout-guided methods highly dependent on the spatial comprehen- sion capability of LLMs or stitching methods relying on autoregressive image generation, once an early prediction deviates, the error will be drastically amplified in 3D optimization. This prompts the present paper to explore a purely visual, implicit geometric skeleton construction method based on correspondence awareness and sparse reconstruction, breaking free from the reliance on explicit layout templates. 2
1.2.4   Scene Reconstruction Based on Neural Representations  NeRF[10] achieved high-quality novel view synthesis through implicit neural radiance field representations but suffered from slow rendering speeds. 3D Gaussian Splatting [11] uses ex- plicit 3D Gaussian primitives to represent scenes, enabling real-time rendering. To overcome its difficulty in extracting precise geometric surfaces, recent works like 2D Gaussian Splatting [27] reduced the dimensionality of primitives to 2D splats, significantly improving the fidelity of geometric reconstruction. More importantly, addressing the structural holes traditional 3DGS easily produces under sparse views, Scaffold-GS [34] proposed utilizing sparse voxels or point clouds as "Anchor Points" to structurally distribute Gaussian primitives. This cutting-edge dis- covery provides strong theoretical backing for the pipeline design in this paper, where Stage 2 utilizes point cloud reconstruction to guide the Gaussian optimization in Stage 4. However, even with optimizations in these underlying representations, rendering high-quality novel views far from existing viewpoints remains highly challenging, especially in sparse view setups, due to insufficient information in under-sampled regions. As shown in Figure 1, when there are only eight input views, obvious ellipsoid and cavity artifacts appear. Figure 1: Example of Sparse View Reconstruction Artifacts  1.2.5   Systematic Limitations of Existing Research  A review of recent literature shows that text-to-3D generation research is leaping from object-level generation to scene-level representation.   Although introducing LLM layouts or video diffusion priors alleviates the difficulties of complex scenes and multi-view consistency to some extent, academia still lacks a systematic end-to-end in-depth analysis on how to build a complete pipeline from text to consistent panoramic images, robust point cloud reconstruction, and then to temporal diffusion interpolation and 3D Gaussian Splatting. Specifically, existing works have three limitations: (1)   Lack of Decoupling and Fault-Tolerance Mechanisms:   Most frontier methods highly rely on a single prior (e.g., strong reliance on accurate LLM layouts). If early predictions fail or views are extremely sparse, errors will directly and black-box-style pollute the final 3D rep- resentation, lacking a fault-tolerance mechanism to effectively decouple geometry estimation from appearance generation. (2)   Vague Inter-Stage Coupling Strategies:   Existing frameworks mostly adopt simple result forwarding without deeply exploring the retention and blocking mechanisms of intermediate features (such as reconstruction confidence) across different stages.   They fail to discuss the 3
double-edged sword effects of loose versus tight coupling on final reconstruction quality. (3)   Unquantified Marginal Effects of Performance Trade-offs:   To what extent can the intro- duction of complex intermediate stages (like video diffusion-based view interpolation) improve geometric completeness? And at the cost of how much high-frequency texture loss? Current research lacks rigorous statistical testing for this kind of "smoothness vs. sharpness trade-off". Addressing these gaps, this paper constructs a progressive four-stage framework and establishes a mixed information passing strategy along with a multi-dimensional evaluation system.  1.3   Main Research Content  Focusing on the complex geometry-appearance coupling problem in complex scene genera- tion, this paper constructs an analyzable and interpretable progressive multi-stage decoupled 3D scene generation system (Text2GS). The main research contents and core contributions include: (1)   Constructing a Progressive Decoupled Framework:   Designing a four-stage pipeline (Panoramic Generation   →   Point Cloud Reconstruction   →   View Interpolation   →   Gaussian Splatting). Establishing a mixed coupling strategy for the information flow of geometric pri- ors   →   appearance refinement (Stage 1 → 2: loose coupling to maintain modularity; Stage 2 → 3: tight coupling to pass spatial confidence; Stage 3 → 4: loose coupling to avoid overfitting), bal- ancing modularity with information retention. (2)   Realizing an End-to-End Automated Pipeline:   By organically integrating the correspondence- aware mechanism (CAA), end-to-end calibration-free dense reconstruction, and temporal dif- fusion priors. Targeting the characteristics of complex environments like indoor scenes, deeply optimizing the 3D-GS training strategy (including adaptive iteration truncation, disabling opac- ity resets, limiting initial point cloud scale, etc.), and forming a highly efficient, stable, and re- producible complete technical solution for text-driven 3D scene generation on consumer-grade hardware (RTX 5090). (3)   Revealing Performance Trade-off Patterns:   Through controlled ablation studies (Variant 124 vs. Variant 1234), demonstrating that introducing the view interpolation module into the pipeline can significantly improve LPIPS perceptual consistency ( p   <   0 . 001) and boost point cloud density by 67%, but at the cost of sacrificing rendering sharpness (decreased by 14.91%) and doubling the time overhead. This finding profoundly reveals the bidirectional impact of the temporal low-pass filtering effect of video interpolation on 3D Gaussian training.  Text2GS Progressive Decoupled Architecture  Stage 1 MVDiusion  Panoramic Sparse Views  Stage 2 DUSt3R  Global Point Cloud  Stage 3 ViewCrafter  Temporal Dense Views  Stage 4 3D-GS  Appearance Optimization  [Input] Text Prompt [Output] 3D Scene Novel View  Sparse Image Set Keyframe Conditions Geometric Renderings Structure Initialization Video/Dense Priors  Figure 2: Overall Process Flowchart of the Text2GS System  1.4   Thesis Organization  Chapter 2 introduces relevant theoretical and technical foundations; Chapter 3 details the progressive multi-stage decoupled 3D scene generation method; Chapter 4 presents the experi- 4
mental design and result analysis; Chapter 5 summarizes the entire paper and discusses future work. 5
2.   Theoretical and Technical Foundations  2.1   Generative Mechanism of Diffusion Models  2.1.1   Theoretical Framework of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models  Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM)[13] construct a forward diffusion pro- cess by gradually adding Gaussian noise to the data, and then learn a reverse denoising process to achieve generation. Given a data distribution   p data ( x 0 ) , the forward process is defined as:  q ( x t   | x t − 1 ) =   N   ( x t   ;   p 1   −   β t   x t − 1 ,   β t   I )  The reverse process predicts noise via a neural network   ε θ   ( x t   , t ) , with the training objective:  L simple   =   E t , x 0 , ε   [ || ε   −   ε θ   ( x t   , t ) || 2 ]  2.1.2   Correspondence-Aware Mechanism for Multi-View Consistency  MVDiffusion[9] introduces the Correspondence-Aware Attention (CAA) mechanism to ex- plicitly model inter-view geometric correspondences in the self-attention layers of the diffusion U-Net. Given multi-view features   F i | N i = 1 , traditional self-attention processes each view inde- pendently:  Attn ( F i ) =   so f tmax ( Q i K ⊤  i √ d   ) V i  CAA computes correspondence relations between views using camera parameters   K i ,   R i , con- structing cross-view attention: CAA ( { F i } ) =   softmax   Q i [ K 1 , . . . ,   K N   ] T   +   M i  √ d    [ V 1 , . . . ,   V N   ]  Here,   M i   is the correspondence mask matrix, computed via epipolar geometry constraints. For spherical panoramic generation, the camera poses are parameterized as:  R i   =   R y ( θ i ) R x ( φ i ) ,   θ i   =   360 ◦  N   ·   i  This parameterization ensures uniform distribution and geometric consistency among views.  2.1.3   Applicability Boundaries of Diffusion Models in 3D Generation  It is important to note that the powerful generative capabilities of diffusion models are built on learning from massive 2D image distributions, and their transfer to 3D tasks involves inherent constraints. Existing literature shows that rendering high-quality novel views far from existing viewpoints remains highly challenging. For example, in sparse view setups, insufficient infor- mation in under-sampled regions causes obvious ellipsoid and cavity artifacts. Therefore, this paper restricts the diffusion model strictly to the view generation and interpolation stages rather than directly optimizing 3D representations, avoiding the over-smoothing problems typical of SDS-based methods. 6
2.2   Algebraic Representation of Calibration-Free 3D Reconstruction  Traditional multi-view reconstruction relies on the Structure-from-Motion (SfM) pipeline, requiring feature matching, camera calibration, and triangulation, which is highly sensitive to textureless areas and repetitive patterns. DUSt3R [12] proposed an end-to-end calibration-free reconstruction method that directly predicts pixel-wise depth and camera poses from image pairs. Recently, its follow-up work MASt3R [35] further unified dense feature matching with stereo geometric reconstruction, proving the robustness of pre-trained large visual models under extreme viewpoints. This paper selects DUSt3R as the core framework. Given an image pair   ( I i ,   I   j ) , DUSt3R extracts features via a Transformer encoder, and a decoder predicts the 3D coordinates for each pixel:  { p k i   ,   p k j } H × W k = 1   =   f θ   ( I i ,   I   j )  Where   p k i   ∈   R 3   are the 3D coordinates of pixel   k   in camera   i ’s coordinate system.   Global alignment is achieved by minimizing the reprojection error: min  { T i }   ∑  ( i ,   j )  ∑  k  w k i j ∥ T i p k i   −   T   j p k j ∥ 2  Where   T i   ∈   SE ( 3 )   is the camera pose, and   w k i j   is the confidence weight. The optimization uses a Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) initialization strategy and solves iteratively via the Levenberg- Marquardt algorithm.  Image   I i  Image   I   j  ViT Encoder  ViT Encoder  Cross- Attention Decoder  Multi-head Attention  Point Map   X i  Point Map   X   j  Global Align (MST + LM)  min   L align  Dense Point Cloud  P  + Condence   C i  + Condence   C   j Correlation Interaction  Figure 3: DUSt3R Point Cloud Reconstruction Process Although DUSt3R avoids explicit calibration, its reconstruction quality is constrained by view overlap and texture distribution. The original paper points out that traditional multi-view reconstruction is sensitive to missing textures and repetitive patterns; similarly, DUSt3R can suffer from point cloud holes in areas with insufficient view overlap or solid-color walls due to feature matching ambiguity. This explains the necessity of uniform sampling in the spher- ical coordinate system adopted in Stage 1 of this paper—ensuring sufficient overlap between adjacent views provides reliable input conditions for DUSt3R.  2.3   Temporal and Spatial Consistency Mapping Theory Based on Video Priors  In traditional 3D reconstruction and view synthesis tasks, when input views are extremely sparse, the missing information in under-sampled regions causes 3D Gaussian Splatting op- timization to fall into local optima, resulting in obvious stretching, cavities, and anomalous ellipsoid artifacts when rendering novel views. It is extremely difficult to generate consistent geometry and texture out of thin air directly in 3D space. 7
Recent theoretical studies (e.g., 3DGS-Enhancer) point out that spatial multi-view consis- tency under continuous camera trajectories and temporal coherence of video frame sequences share high isomorphism on the latent manifold distribution. Based on this theoretical insight, the complex 3D consistency constraint problem can be dimensionally reduced and reformulated as a temporal consistency image restoration task within a video generation framework. Under this theoretical framework, this study introduces the ViewCrafter video diffusion model, feeding the discrete sparse views as keyframes into the video latent diffusion model. Given keyframes   I 0 ,   I T   and camera trajectory   c t   , the video diffusion model operates through its internal cross-frame spatio-temporal attention mechanism and 3D residual convolutions:  TemporalAttn ( F t   ) =   so f tmax ( Q t   [ K 0 , ...,   K T   ] ⊤  √ d   )[ V 0 , ..., V T   ]  This spatio-temporal self-attention mechanism essentially performs a kind of "soft epipolar constraint" in the latent feature space, allowing the interpolated intermediate frame sequence to transition smoothly visually while implicitly adhering to the perspective projection rules of 3D space. Densifying views through video priors avoids explicit depth estimation errors while providing dense observation signals with high information entropy and geometric consistency for the subsequent 3D Gaussian optimization.  2.4   Information Passing Strategy in Progressive Generation  Progressive generation refines results step by step through a multi-stage pipeline, where each stage focuses on a specific sub-task. The information passing strategy determines the degree of coupling between stages: 1.   Loose Coupling:   Only the final output (e.g., images, point clouds) is passed, and each stage is optimized independently. Advantage: strong modularity; Disadvantage: infor- mation loss. 2.   Tight Coupling:   Intermediate features and uncertainty estimates are passed, allowing subsequent stages to utilize preceding information. Advantage: retains complete infor- mation; Disadvantage: increases complexity. This paper adopts a mixed strategy: Stage 1 → 2 passes images and camera parameters (loose coupling), Stage 2 → 3 passes point clouds, poses, and confidence levels (tight coupling), and Stage 3 → 4 passes dense views and refined poses (loose coupling). This design balances mod- ularity and information passing efficiency.  2.5   Shortcomings of Existing Combination Strategies  Existing text-to-3D methods are mainly divided into two categories: SDS-based optimiza- tion methods that directly optimize 3D representations through gradient guidance from pre- trained diffusion models, but suffer from over-smoothing, Janus problems, and long optimiza- tion times; feed-forward methods based on multi-view generation that first generate multi-view images and then reconstruct 3D models, but struggle to guarantee multi-view consistency. How- ever, existing works mostly focus on improving a single step, lacking end-to-end system design and explicit discussion of the coupling strength of inter-stage information passing. The pro- gressive decoupled framework proposed in this paper seeks a balance between modularity and information retention through explicitly designed inter-stage coupling strategies (Stage 1 → 2: loose coupling, Stage 2 → 3: tight coupling, Stage 3 → 4: loose coupling). 8
3.   Progressive Multi-Stage Decoupled 3D Scene Generation Method  3.1   System Architecture and Information Flow  The design of this framework follows the following principles: first establish a global ge- ometric skeleton (Stage 2), and then refine the appearance under geometric constraints (Stage 3), avoiding the mutual amplification of geometric errors and appearance noise; each stage only solves a well-posed sub-problem, reducing the complexity of end-to-end optimization. Based on this, the information flow is designed as follows: Stage 1 provides a globally consistent appearance prior; Stage 2 establishes the geometric skeleton and outputs confidence levels; Stage 3 utilizes temporal coherence to generate dense views under geometric constraints; Stage 4 elevates the 2.5D representations into a complete 3D scene. The inter-stage coupling strategies are: Stage 1 → 2 passes images and camera parameters (loose coupling, strong mod- ularity); Stage 2 → 3 passes point clouds, poses, and confidence levels (tight coupling, retaining uncertainty information); Stage 3 → 4 passes dense views and refined poses (loose coupling, avoiding overfitting).  3.2   Correspondence-Aware Generation of Panoramic Views  3.2.1   Camera Parameterization in Spherical Coordinate System  The 360 ◦   panoramic generation of indoor scenes requires uniformly distributed viewpoint coverage. The camera poses are parameterized using a spherical coordinate system:  θ i   =   360 ◦  N   ·   i ,   φ i   =   0 ◦ ,   i   =   0 ,   1 , . . . ,   N   −   1 Where   θ i   is the azimuth angle and   φ i   is the elevation angle.   The camera rotation matrix is calculated via Rodrigues’ formula:  R i   =   R y ( θ i ) R x ( φ i )  The intrinsic matrix is determined by the Field of View (FOV) and the resolution:  K   =     f   0   c x  0   f   c y  0   0   1      ,   f   =   W  2 tan ( FOV / 2 )  This ensures sufficient overlapping areas between adjacent views for correspondence modeling.  3.2.2   Attention Mechanism for Cross-View Feature Alignment  The correspondence-aware attention in MVDiffusion constructs cross-view attention masks through epipolar geometric constraints. Given the feature point   x i   in view   i , its corresponding epipolar line in view   j   is:  l i j   =   F i j x i ,   F i j   =   K − T j   [ t i j ] × R i j K − 1  i  9
Where   F i j   is the fundamental matrix, and   [ t i j ] ×   is the skew-symmetric matrix. The correspon- dence mask   M i j   is generated by thresholding the epipolar distance:  M i j ( p ,   q ) =  (  1 ,   dist ( x q j   ,   l p j   )   <   τ  0 ,   otherwise In practice, the CAA module is inserted into every self-attention layer of the MVDiffusion U-Net to achieve cross-view information interaction via masked attention. It is important to clarify that MVDiffusion was chosen because its correspondence-aware at- tention mechanism highly aligns with the spherical panoramic generation requirements of this paper. In the progressive framework, the core task of Stage 1 is to provide "globally consistent and adjacency-correspondent" sparse observations, rather than pursuing extreme photorealism in single images. The epipolar constraints of MVDiffusion perfectly ensure the geometric con- sistency of adjacent views, providing inputs that meet the overlap requirements for DUSt3R re- construction in Stage 2. If independently generated single-view images were stitched together, the lack of explicit geometric constraints between views would lead to point correspondence prediction failures in Stage 2.  3.3   Global Alignment Optimization for Point Cloud Reconstruction  3.3.1   Confidence-Weighted Geometric Consistency Constraints  This paper uses DUSt3R to perform point cloud reconstruction. The predicted pixel-wise depth includes uncertainty estimates, represented by the confidence map   C i   ∈   [ 0 ,   1 ] H × W   . Global alignment optimization introduces confidence weighting:  L align   =   ∑  ( i ,   j ) ∈ E  H × W  ∑  k = 1  w k i j || T i   p k i   −   T j   p k j || 2  Where the weight   w k i j   =   C k i   ·   C k j , which suppresses the impact of low-confidence regions (e.g., textureless areas) on the optimization. In addition, a background mask   M bg   is introduced to filter out distant background points:  M k bg   =   I [ d k i   >   τ bg   ·   ( max ( d i ) +   min ( d i )) / 2 ]  Where   d k i   is the depth value, and   τ bg   =   0 . 2 is the threshold.  3.3.2   Minimum Spanning Tree Initialization Strategy  Global alignment is a non-convex optimization problem, making initialization crucial. DUSt3R adopts a Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) strategy: 1. Construct a view graph   G   = ( V   ,   E   ) , where edge weights are the negative values of the predicted confidence. 2. Compute the MST, selecting the edges with the highest confidence as the initialization path. 3. Starting from the root node   v 0 , sequentially accumulate relative poses along the MST to obtain global poses. 10
Formally, assuming the root node is   v 0 , the global pose for node   v i   is:  T i   =   T v 0 → v 1   ·   T v 1 → v 2   · · ·   T v k − 1 → v i  Where the path   v 0   →   v 1   → · · · →   v i   is the unique path from the root to   v i   in the MST.  3.3.3   Iterative Optimization and Convergence Criteria  Global alignment utilizes the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm for iterative optimization. At each iteration, the pose parameters   ξ i   ∈   se ( 3 )   are updated:  ξ   ( t + 1 )  i   =   ξ   ( t )  i   −   ( J T   WJ   +   λ   I ) − 1 J T   Wr  Where   J   is the Jacobian matrix,   W   is the weight matrix,   r   is the residual vector, and   λ   is the damping coefficient. The convergence criterion is:  ∥ L   ( t )  align   −   L   ( t − 1 )  align   ∥  L   ( t − 1 )  align  <   ε  This paper sets   ε   =   10 − 4 , and the maximum number of iterations   T max   =   300. It is worth noting that Stage 2 → 3 adopts tight coupling, passing the confidence weights pre- dicted by DUSt3R to Stage 3, rather than only passing the point cloud coordinates. The reason is that ViewCrafter’s point cloud-guided rendering needs to know which regions have reliable geometry. Low-confidence regions (such as distant objects or textureless walls) appear blurry or missing in the rendered condition images, prompting the diffusion model to rely more on generative priors rather than geometric constraints in these areas, thereby avoiding the forceful propagation of reconstruction errors from Stage 2 to Stage 3.  3.4   Temporal Diffusion Synthesis of Dense Views  3.4.1   Point Cloud-Guided View Interpolation  ViewCrafter provides geometric guidance through point cloud rendering.   Given camera trajectories   c t   | T t = 0 , the point cloud is rendered to each viewpoint:  I render t   =   Render ( P sparse ,   c t   )  The rendering uses the PyTorch3D [19] point cloud rasterizer, with parameters set to: radius  r   =   0 . 01, points per pixel   K   =   10. The rendered image serves as a conditional input, which is concatenated with the noise image and fed into the diffusion U-Net:  x input t   = [ x noise t   ,   I render t   ]  This design ensures that the generated views align with the point cloud geometry, preventing hallucination.  3.4.2   Sampling Strategy with Keyframe Preservation  To maintain consistency with the views generated in Stage 1, a keyframe preservation strat- egy is adopted: 11
Sparse Keyframes  I key  Point Cloud Renderings  I render  Video Diffusion U-Net  3D ResNet Blocks Spatial Self-Attn Temporal Cross-Attn  Dense Views Sequence  I dense  Gaussian Noise   x t  + Camera Poses  Keyframe Anchor Geometry Guidance Injection Denoise Output T-step Denoising Iteration  Figure 4: ViewCrafter Dense View Interpolation 1. Set the   N   views from Stage 1 as keyframes, fixing their positions. 2. Interpolate a video of   L   −   1 frames between adjacent keyframes. 3. Uniformly sample   M sample   frames from the generated video. 4. Combine the keyframes and the sampled frames to obtain   M   =   N   +   M sample   views. The sampling index is calculated as:  I key   =   { 0 ,   T ,   2 T , . . . ,   ( N   −   1 ) T   }   =   { 0 ,   T ,   2 T , . . . ,   L   −   1 }  Where:  I key   =  (  i   ·     L   −   1  N   −   1    i   =   0 ,   1 , . . . ,   N   −   1  )  is the keyframe index. The essence of the keyframe preservation strategy is to strike a balance between temporal coherence and view fidelity. If ViewCrafter were allowed to freely generate all 24 views, smooth viewpoint transitions could be obtained, but the original semantic infor- mation generated in Stage 1 might be diluted by temporal smoothing effects (experimentally shown as a 3.53% drop in TIA). Retaining the 8 keyframes generated in Stage 1 is equivalent to inserting anchors during temporal diffusion, constraining the generated views from deviating from the original text semantics. This design also explains why Variant 1234 did not signifi- cantly improve MVC—the semantic consistency of the keyframes was already guaranteed by Stage 1, and the interpolated views in Stage 3 mainly improved geometric continuity rather than semantic consistency.  3.4.3   DUSt3R Reconstruction and Pose Refinement  The   M   sampled views are sent back into DUSt3R for reconstruction, yielding the dense point cloud   P dense   and refined poses   T   j | M j = 1 . Compared to Stage 2, the reconstruction at this point 12
has the following advantages: (1) The increased number of views provides denser geometric constraints; (2) The point cloud guidance ensures geometric consistency between the interpo- lated views and the initial geometry. Experiments show that when the number of sampled views is 18 frames, the point cloud density of the dense reconstruction increases by 67%.  3.5   Scene Representation and Optimization of Gaussian Splatting  3.5.1   COLMAP Format Export  Stage 4 converts the DUSt3R reconstruction results into the COLMAP format, including: (1)   cameras.txt : camera intrinsics using the PINHOLE model; (2)   images.txt : image list and extrinsics (quaternions + translation vectors); (3)   points3D.txt : initial point cloud con- taining position and color information.   Camera extrinsic transformation uses the world-to- camera representation:  T w 2 c j   =   T − 1  j   ,   R w 2 c   =   T w 2 c j   [ : 3 ,   : 3 ] ,   t w 2 c   =   T w 2 c j   [ : 3 ,   3 ]  The rotation matrix is converted to a quaternion   q   = [ q w ,   q x ,   q y ,   q z ]   using the Scipy Rotation module.   The point cloud sampling strategy is to uniformly sample a maximum of   K max   =  500 ,   000 points from the dense point cloud for Gaussian initialization to prevent VRAM over- flow.  3.5.2   Gaussian Splatting Training Strategy  3D-GS achieves end-to-end training via differentiable rasterization. Each Gaussian primi- tive is represented as:  G k   = ( μ k ,   Σ k ,   c k ,   α k )  Where   μ k   ∈   R 3   is the center position,   Σ k   is the covariance matrix,   c k   are the Spherical Harmonics (SH) coefficients (the derivation of its rotational invariance is detailed in Appendix A), and   α k  is the opacity. The training loss is:  L   = ( 1   −   λ   ) L 1   +   λ   L D − SSIM  Where   L 1   is the L1 loss,   L D − SSIM   is the structural similarity loss, and   λ   =   0 . 2. In this paper, optimizations are made tailored to the characteristics of indoor scenes: (1) Reduce training iter- ations: decreased from the default 30,000 to 7,000 to prevent overfitting and VRAM shortages. (2) Disable opacity resets: set   opacity_reset_interval=100000   to prevent structural holes caused by deleting valid points. (3) Limit the initial point cloud scale: downsample to 500,000 points to balance quality and efficiency. Experiments show that convergence can be reached within 7,000 iterations, with a training time of about 3-4 minutes (RTX 5090).  3.6   Limitations of the Proposed Framework  It must be candidly pointed out that the framework proposed in this paper has limitations at the methodological level. The failure of any module in the pipeline will lead to a decline in overall performance. For instance, if the panoramic image generated by MVDiffusion has severe distortions, subsequent stages cannot correct it. Moreover, the current information flow is unidirectional, lacking a mechanism to back-propagate optimization from Stage 4 to Stages 1-3. Additionally, the current design is aimed at closed indoor scenes, and the spherical coor- dinate system parameterization is not suitable for unbounded outdoor environments. The above limitations point out the direction for future improvements. 13
4.   Experimental Design and Result Analysis  4.1   Experimental Environment and Datasets  Hardware configuration: NVIDIA RTX 5090 (32GB VRAM), CUDA 12.8. Software environment: Python 3.10, PyTorch 2.7.1, PyTorch3D 0.7.5. Test datasets: A test set containing 15 indoor scene text prompts was constructed, categorized into three levels based on complexity: 1. Simple scenes (5): single furniture and basic structures, e.g., "A cozy bedroom with a bed and nightstand" 2. Medium scenes (5): multiple furniture and decorative elements, e.g., "A modern kitchen with marble countertops and stainless steel appliances" 3. Complex scenes (5): rich details and spatial hierarchy, e.g., "A luxurious master bedroom with a king-size bed, chandelier, and floor-to-ceiling windows" All experiments used a fixed random seed ( seed=42 ) to ensure reproducibility. Since this paper did not modify the internal network structure of each module, direct comparisons with SOTA methods (e.g., replacing MVDiffusion with MVDream) would introduce multiple confounding variables, making it difficult to interpret the source of performance differences. Therefore, the core experimental design of this paper is a controlled ablation study (Variant 124 vs. Variant 1234), which precisely controls the number of views as a single variable to quantify the marginal contribution of Stage 3 to the final 3D representation. Although this design cannot prove that the framework of this paper is superior to existing methods on all metrics, it rigorously demonstrates the causal effect of the view interpolation stage on specific metrics.  4.2   Evaluation Metrics System  4.2.1   Core Evaluation Metrics  A multi-dimensional evaluation system was established, covering consistency, quality, ge- ometry, and efficiency: 1.   Multi-view Consistency (MVC):   Features are extracted using CLIP [20] ViT-B/32, and the cosine similarity between adjacent views is calculated: MVC   =   1  N  N  ∑  i = 1  cos ( f i ,   f i + 1 )  Where   f i   is the CLIP feature of view   i .   This metric reflects the semantic consistency between views, ranging from   [ 0 ,   1 ] , where higher is better. 2.   Text-Image Alignment (TIA):   The cosine similarity between text embeddings and im- age features is calculated: TIA   =   1  N  N  ∑  i = 1  cos ( f text   ,   f i )  This metric measures the match between the generated images and the text description, ranging from   [ 0 ,   1 ] , where higher is better. 14
3.   Perceptual Quality (LPIPS Consistency):   LPIPS (Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity) [14] is used to measure the perceptual distance of adjacent views: LPIPS   =   1  N   −   1  N − 1  ∑  i = 1  LPIPS ( I i ,   I i + 1 )  LPIPS is based on AlexNet features, ranging from   [ 0 ,   1 ] , where lower indicates better perceptual consistency. 4.   Rendering Quality:   A no-reference metric combining sharpness and contrast: Quality   =   0 . 6   ·   Sharpness norm   +   0 . 4   ·   Contrast norm  Sharpness is calculated via Laplacian variance, and contrast is the standard deviation of grayscale, normalized to   [ 0 ,   1 ] . 5.   Point Cloud Quality:   Includes the number of points, nearest neighbor distance, point cloud density, and coverage:  Density   =   N points  V bbox  Coverage   =   log 10 ( N points   +   1 )  d nn   +   ε  Where   V bbox   is the bounding box volume, and ¯ d nn   is the average nearest neighbor distance. 6.   Fréchet Inception Distance (FID):   Measures the distance between the generated image distribution and the real distribution: FID   =   ∥ μ r   −   μ g ∥ 2   +   Tr ( Σ r   +   Σ g   −   2 ( Σ r Σ g ) 1 / 2 )  Where   μ r ,   Σ r   are the mean and covariance of Inception features for real images, and   μ g ,   Σ g  are the statistics for generated images. A lower FID indicates higher generated quality.  4.2.2   Evaluation Methodology  To accurately evaluate system performance, a two-stage evaluation strategy is employed: 1. Intermediate evaluation: Based on the output images of Stage 1 (MVDiffusion), used to analyze the quality evolution across different stages. 2. Final evaluation:   Based on the images rendered by the trained 3D-GS model (itera- tion=7000). This is the actual output of the system and the main result reported in this paper. The final evaluation better reflects the practical performance of the system because it encom- passes the effect of the complete pipeline and the impact of 3DGS training on image quality. 15
Table 1: Results of Progressive Comparative Experiments  Metric   Variant 124   Variant 1234   Difference (%)   p-value   Cohen’s d   Significance  MVC (CLIP)   ↑   0.9382   0.9401   +0.20%   0.627   +0.170   ×  TIA (CLIP)   ↑   0.3132   0.3025   -3.42%   0.001   -0.546   ✓  Rendering Quality   ↑   0.4878   0.4245   -12.98%   0.012   -1.063   ✓  LPIPS   ↓   0.6604   0.5524   -16.35%   <0.001   -2.507   ✓✓  Point Cloud Count   23,221,356   23,344,492   +0.53%   -   -   - Point Cloud Density (points/m 3 )   31,802,516   53,102,248   +67%   -   -   - Coverage   12,081.85   12,089.35   +0.06%   -   -   - Execution Time (minutes)   3.19   11.49   +260%   -   -   3.6 ×  Note:   ✓   indicates p   <   0 . 05 ,   ✓✓   indicates p   <   0 . 001 ,   ×   indicates p   ≥   0 . 05 .  4.3   Ablation Study and Comparative Analysis  4.3.1   Causal Effect Analysis of Progressive Decoupling  To evaluate the actual contribution of Stage 3 (ViewCrafter), two variants were designed for comparison: 1. Variant 124: Skips Stage 3, directly training 3D-GS from 8 sparse views. 2. Variant 1234: Complete pipeline, training 3D-GS using 24 dense views. Table 1 shows that the MVC for Variant 124 and Variant 1234 are 0.9382 and 0.9401, respectively, with no significant difference ( p   =   0 . 627). This "negative result" holds important enlightenment: in the 3D-GS training framework, semantic consistency is primarily determined by sparse keyframes rather than view density. Because Variant 1234 preserved the 8 keyframes from Stage 1, its semantic skeleton is fundamentally consistent with Variant 124; the newly added 16 interpolated views mainly fill viewpoint transitions and have limited contributions to CLIP semantic features. This result implies that if MVC is the sole optimization objective, 8 sparse views are sufficient, avoiding the 260% time overhead of Stage 3. LPIPS dropped from 0.6604 to 0.5524 ( p   <   0 . 001, Cohen’s   d   =   − 2 . 507), demonstrating that dense views significantly improved the perceptual smoothness of novel view synthesis. Combined with the phenomenon of a 67% increase in point cloud density, it can be inferred that dense views provided DUSt3R with more adequate triangulation constraints, reducing ellipsoid artifacts in under-sampled regions (as shown in Figure 1), thereby reducing perceptual jumps during novel view rendering. However, this geometric continuity improvement did not cover a larger space (Coverage increased by only 0.06%), indicating that the interpolated views mainly "densified" existing geometry rather than "expanding" the spatial boundaries. The 12.98% drop in Rendering Quality ( p   =   0 . 012) reveals the inherent tension between view interpolation and 3D-GS training. Possible mechanisms include: (1) Temporal smooth- ing effect:   To ensure inter-frame coherence, ViewCrafter applies temporal low-pass filter- ing to high-frequency textures, leading to lower sharpness in interpolated views compared to keyframes; (2) Densification strategy mismatch: The current gradient densification strategy in 3D-GS is based on spatial gradients and is more sensitive to view changes in dense views, which may cause Gaussian spheres to overly split in smooth areas, ironically diluting representation capability. Experiments found that introducing dense views significantly decreases LPIPS, but ren- dering sharpness drops (Table 1). From the underlying optimization logic of 3DGS, although video diffusion priors fill in geometric gaps in sparse regions via Temporal Layers, suppress- ing the generation of anomalously large-scale Gaussian primitives, the native generative ten- dency of video models often exerts mild suppression on high-frequency details (low-pass fil- 16
tering effect). Consequently, when 3DGS fits these interpolated views, it is forced to seek a "compromise (greatest common denominator)" among minor inconsistencies, thereby diluting the sharp edges brought by the original keyframes. This empirical finding highly aligns with the rationale behind recent works (such as the confidence-weighting mechanism introduced by 3DGS-Enhancer) and further validates the inherent theoretical trade-off between smoothness and clarity regarding information transfer in multi-stage pipelines. Synthesizing Table 1, the framework of this paper presents a clear Pareto frontier: if extreme efficiency is pursued (3.19 minutes) and some artifacts are tolerable, Variant 124 is superior; if perceptual smoothness in novel view synthesis is the goal and higher time costs (11.49 min- utes) are acceptable, Variant 1234 is superior. This trade-off boundary provides clear decision- making evidence for practical applications.  4.3.2   Quality Evolution Analysis  To deeply understand the impact of 3D-GS training on image quality, the quality changes between Stage 1 images and the final rendered images are compared: Table 2: Quality Evolution Comparison - Stage 1 Images vs. Rendered Images  Metric   Variant 124   Variant 1234 Stage 1   Rendered Image   Change (%)   Stage 1   Rendered Image   Change (%)  MVC (CLIP)   0.9483   0.9382   -1.07%   0.9455   0.9401   -0.57% TIA (CLIP)   0.3147   0.3132   -0.50%   0.3143   0.3025   -3.78% Rendering Quality   0.5063   0.4878   -3.64%   0.4729   0.4245   -10.22% All metrics show some decline after 3D-GS training, which is a typical phenomenon of fitting multi-view data with a limited number of Gaussian primitives. Since photometric recon- struction errors need to be balanced across multiple viewpoints, the Gaussian spheres tend to learn the "greatest common denominator" features among views, leading to losses in sharpness, contrast, and semantic alignment.  4.3.3   Failure Cases and Boundary Condition Analysis  To comprehensively evaluate framework robustness, qualitative analysis was conducted on typical degeneration modes observed in experiments: 1. Repetitive texture areas: DUSt3R encounters correspondence ambiguity in areas with repetitive textures, leading to local layering in the point cloud and ghosting artifacts dur- ing 3D-GS rendering.   This suggests that the confidence weights in Stage 2 might be overly optimistic in repetitive texture regions. 2. Highly reflective surfaces: Virtual images from reflective surfaces like mirrors are gener- ated as real geometry by MVDiffusion, then smoothed into blurry areas by ViewCrafter, ultimately creating cavities at the mirror’s location in 3D-GS. This case illustrates that the current framework lacks explicit modeling of material semantics. 3. Large-scale spaces: Uniform sampling in the spherical coordinate system may lead to in- sufficient viewpoint resolution for distant objects, resulting in sparse reconstructed point clouds. This validates the "scene type limitation" discussed in Section 3.6. 17
4.4   System Performance and Resource Overhead  4.4.1   Memory Optimization Strategy  By enabling the   unload_between_stages   option to unload models from VRAM between stages, peak memory usage dropped from 23.5GB to 18.2GB, allowing stable operation on 24GB graphics cards.  4.4.2   Execution Time Breakdown  Time breakdown for Variant 1234 (average values): Stage 1 (MVDiffusion): 45 seconds Stage 2 (DUSt3R): 38 seconds Stage 3 (ViewCrafter): 412 seconds (generated 7 video clips, approx. 60s each) Stage 4 (3D-GS Training): 166 seconds (7,000 iterations) Total: 661 seconds   ≈   11 minutes Bottleneck analysis:   ViewCrafter accounts for 62% of the total time, marking it as the primary bottleneck.  4.4.3   FID Analysis  Calculating the FID between Variant 124 and Variant 1234, the overall FID is 92.77, in- dicating that the image distributions generated by both methods are close. Sub-scene analysis shows: Simple scenes average FID: 164.9 Medium scenes average FID: 158.1 Complex scenes average FID: 161.7 The higher FID values are primarily because the sample size is small (only 8-24 images per scene), and the image distributions of the two methods themselves are very close.  4.5   Quantitative and Qualitative Comparison with SOTA Methods  To comprehensively evaluate the proposed framework, we conduct a direct quantitative comparison between Text2GS (Variant 1234) and a recent State-of-the-Art (SOTA) scene-level generation method, DreamScene. The comparison metrics cover generation quality, semantic alignment, and crucially, hardware resource overhead. Table 3: Quantitative Comparison with DreamScene  Metric   Text2GS (Variant 1234)   DreamScene   Advantage  Peak VRAM   ↓   18.2 GB   > 40.0 GB   Text2GS Execution Time   ↓   11.49 mins   64.40 mins   Text2GS (5 . 6 ×   faster) TIA (CLIP)   ↑   0.3025   0.2639   Text2GS (+14.6%) MVC (CLIP)   ↑   0.9401   0.9657   DreamScene Rendering Quality   ↑   0.4245   0.6555   DreamScene LPIPS Consistency   ↓   0.5524   0.3315   DreamScene Based on the data in Table 3, the comparative analysis is organized into three dimensions: 18
1.   Significant Reduction in Resource Overhead (Hardware Accessibility):   A critical bottleneck in current scene-level 3D generation is hardware accessibility.   Generating a full scene with DreamScene requires over 40GB of VRAM, heavily restricting its deployment to expensive data-center GPUs (e.g., NVIDIA A6000 or A100). In stark contrast, Text2GS drasti- cally reduces the memory footprint. By employing the stage-wise execution and memory opti- mization strategies (such as model unloading), Text2GS operates stably with a peak VRAM of just 18.2GB. This reduction of over 55% in memory overhead, combined with a 5 . 6 ×   speedup (11.49 mins vs. 64.40 mins), validates our progressive decoupled framework. It proves that complex 3D scene generation can be democratized and efficiently executed on consumer-grade graphics cards (e.g., RTX 3090/4090). 2.   Superior Text-Image Alignment:   Interestingly, although DreamScene excels in geo- metric consistency, Text2GS achieves a higher Text-Image Alignment (TIA) score (0.3025 vs. 0.2639). This can be attributed to the early semantic lock-in mechanism of Stage 1. In lengthy global optimization methods, representations often suffer from mode collapse or texture over- smoothing, causing the final appearance to drift away from the original text prompt. Text2GS, by firmly anchoring the text semantics in the initial sparse views and strictly preserving these keyframes in Stage 3, exhibits stronger robustness in maintaining prompt fidelity. 3.   Acknowledging Limitations and Quality Trade-offs:   It must be acknowledged that DreamScene outperforms Text2GS in Rendering Quality (0.6555 vs. 0.4245) and perceptual consistency (LPIPS: 0.3315 vs. 0.5524). This quantitative gap corroborates the findings in our ablation study (Section 4.3): feed-forward view interpolation and discrete 3DGS optimization, while extremely fast, struggle to achieve the extreme geometric continuity characteristic of heavy implicit field optimization. DreamScene’s superior LPIPS indicates smoother viewpoint transitions. Therefore, Text2GS and DreamScene represent a Pareto optimal trade-off: Text2GS prioritizes extreme generating speed, low hardware barriers, and semantic accuracy, whereas DreamScene pursues ultimate geometric and perceptual smoothness at the cost of computational resources. Beyond direct data comparison, qualitative comparisons at the methodological level against early SDS-based and feed-forward methods are summarized in Table 4. Table 4: Qualitative Comparison with Existing Methods  Dimension   SDS-based   Methods (DreamFusion) Feed-forward   Meth- ods (Zero-1-to-3) Proposed Framework Generation Time   Hours   Minutes   11 minutes  Multi-view Consistency   Prone to Janus   Relies on training data   Explicitly   constrained by CAA mechanism  Geometric Robustness   Prone   to   over- smoothing Limited   by   single- image prior Calibration-free recon- struction,   decoupling geometry   and   appear- ance  Modularity Level   End-to-end,   hard   to tune Two   stages,   relatively simple Four stages, any mod- ule replaceable 19
5.   Conclusions and Future Work  5.1   Main Conclusions  Addressing the complexity of "geometry-appearance" coupled optimization in text-driven 3D generation, this paper implements the Text2GS progressive multi-stage decoupled frame- work. It decomposes the task into four controllable sub-tasks and establishes a mixed information- passing mechanism. The framework verifies the engineering feasibility of progressive decou- pling, as the four-stage pipeline can run stably on a consumer-grade graphics card (RTX 5090, 24GB). Through rigorous controlled experiments, it reveals the differentiated impact of the view interpolation stage on the final 3D representation: it significantly improves perceptual smooth- ness (LPIPS   ↓   16.35%) and geometric density ( ↑   67%), but offers no significant gain in semantic consistency, and comes at the cost of rendering sharpness (decreased by 14.91%) and increased time overhead ( ↑   260%). These findings demonstrate that pipeline designs for text-to-3D gen- eration must balance efficiency, geometric completeness, and appearance sharpness according to specific application scenarios. Furthermore, quantitative comparison with the SOTA method DreamScene positions Text2GS as a highly accessible alternative. While it trades a degree of perceptual smoothness and rendering quality for efficiency, Text2GS achieves a 5 . 6 ×   speedup and reduces the peak VRAM requirement from >40GB to merely 18.2GB, alongside enhanced semantic fidelity (TIA) to text prompts. Ultimately, this thesis demonstrates that high-quality 3D scene generation is no longer confined to data-center resources, successfully providing a highly feasible, consumer-hardware friendly solution for text-to-3D prototyping.  5.2   Future Work  The modular nature of the proposed framework provides clear interfaces for future improve- ments: 1.   Efficiency Optimization:   The complete pipeline currently takes about 11 minutes, with ViewCrafter accounting for 62% of the total time, serving as the main bottleneck.   As proposed in the original literature, future work can explore consistency distillation models to achieve single-step or few-step generation, or perform view interpolation in the latent space to replace current pixel-space diffusion. 2.   Generalization Capability:   The original literature points out that current methods are designed for indoor scenes, and their adaptability to large outdoor scenes or object-level generation remains to be verified. Future research can explore adaptive camera parame- terizations to adjust viewpoint distributions based on scene types. 3.   Dynamic Pipeline:   Based on the performance trade-offs discovered in this paper’s ex- periments (Variant 124 vs. Variant 1234), future work can construct adaptive strategies that dynamically adjust whether to activate Stage 3 depending on scene complexity. 20
References  [1] Rombach R, Blattmann A, Lorenz D, et al. High-resolution image synthesis with latent  diffusion models[C]//CVPR, 2022: 10684-10695.  [2] Saharia C, Chan W, Saxena S, et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with  deep language understanding[C]//NeurIPS, 2022: 36479-36494.  [3] Poole B, Jain A, Barron J T, et al. DreamFusion: Text-to-3D using 2D diffusion[C]//ICLR,  2023.  [4] Lin C H, Gao J, Tang L, et al. Magic3D: High-resolution text-to-3D content cre-  ation[C]//CVPR, 2023: 300-309.  [5] Wang Z, Lu C, Wang Y, et al. ProlificDreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3D gen-  eration with variational score distillation[C]//NeurIPS, 2023.  [6] Liu R, Wu R, Van Hoorick B, et al. Zero-1-to-3:   Zero-shot one image to 3D ob-  ject[C]//ICCV, 2023: 9298-9309.  [7] Liu M, Xu C, Jin H, et al. One-2-3-45: Any single image to 3D mesh in 45 seconds without  per-shape optimization[C]//NeurIPS, 2023.  [8] Shi Y, Wang P, Ye J, et al. MVDream: Multi-view diffusion for 3D generation[C]//ICLR,  2024.  [9] Tang S, Zhang F, Chen J, et al. MVDiffusion: Enabling holistic multi-view image genera-  tion with correspondence-aware diffusion[C]//NeurIPS, 2023.  [10] Mildenhall B, Srinivasan P P, Tancik M, et al. NeRF: Representing scenes as neural radi-  ance fields for view synthesis[C]//ECCV, 2020: 405-421.  [11] Kerbl B, Kopanas G, Leimkühler T, et al. 3D Gaussian splatting for real-time radiance  field rendering[J]. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2023, 42(4): 1-14.  [12] Wang S, Leroy V, Cabon Y, et al. DUSt3R: Geometric 3D vision made easy[C]//CVPR,  2024.  [13] Ho J, Jain A, Abbeel P. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models[C]//NeurIPS, 2020:  6840-6851.  [14] Zhang R, Isola P, Efros A A, et al. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a  perceptual metric[C]//CVPR, 2018: 586-595.  [15] Ren J, Pan L, Tang J, et al. 3DGS-Enhancer: Enhancing 3D Gaussian Splatting with Video  Diffusion[C]//NeurIPS, 2024.  [16] Yu W, Xing J, Yuan L, et al. ViewCrafter: Taming video diffusion models for high-fidelity  novel view synthesis[J]. IEEE TPAMI, 2025.  [17] Li Y, et al. SplatFlow: Rectified Flow for 3D Gaussian Splatting[C]//CVPR, 2025.  21
[18] Jiang Y, et al. GALA3D: Towards Text-to-3D Complex Scene Generation via Layout- guided Generative Modeling[C]//ICML, 2024. [19] Ravi N, Reizenstein J, Novotny D, et al. Accelerating 3D deep learning with Py- Torch3D[R]. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08501, 2020. [20] Radford A, Kim J W, Hallacy C, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision (CLIP)[C]//ICML, 2021: 8748-8763. [21] Hong Y, Zhang K, Gu J, et al. LRM: Large reconstruction model for single image to 3D[C]//The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. [22] Tang J, Ren J, Zhou H, et al. DreamGaussian: Generative Gaussian Splatting for Efficient 3D Content Creation[C]//The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa- tions (ICLR), 2024. [23] Liu Y, Lin C, Zeng Z, et al. SyncDreamer: Generating Multiview-consistent Images from a Single-view Image[C]//The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa- tions (ICLR), 2024. [24] Poole B, Luo S, Wang Y, et al. Stable Video 3D: Quality novel view synthesis and explo- ration of latent video diffusion[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12008, 2024. [25] Höllein L, Cao J, Owens A, et al. Text2Room: Extracting 3D Indoor Meshes from 2D Text-to-Image Models[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023: 11900-11911. [26] Chung H, Oh S, Lee J, et al. LucidDreamer: Towards High-Fidelity Text-to-3D Genera- tion via Multipose Guidance[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024. [27] Huang B, Yu Z, Chen D, et al. 2D Gaussian Splatting for Geometrically Accurate Radiance Fields[C]//ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers. 2024: 1-11. [28] Zhang L, Rao A, Agrawala M. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). 2023: 3836-3847. [29] Wang H, Du X, Li J, et al. Score Jacobian Chaining: Simulating 3D priors with 2D dif- fusion[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2023: 169-179. [30] Yi T, Fang J, Wu G, et al. GaussianDreamer: Fast Generation from Text to 3D Gaussians by Bridging 2D and 3D Diffusion Models[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2024: 21092-21102. [31] Long X, Guo Y, Lin C, et al. Wonder3D: Single Image to 3D using Cross-Domain Dif- fusion[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2024: 9970-9980. [32] Charatan D, Li S, LeGendre C, et al. pixelSplat: 3D Gaussian Splats from Image Pairs for Scalable Generalizable 3D Reconstruction[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2024: 19457-19467. 22
[33] Chen Z, Wang A, Li B, et al. SceneDreamer: Unbounded 3D Scene Generation from Text[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). 2023: 14751-14761. [34] Lu T, Yu M, Xu L, et al. Scaffold-GS: Structured 3D Gaussians for View-Adaptive Ren- dering[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2024: 20654-20664. [35] Rozenberszki D, Leroy V, Weinzaepfel G, et al. MASt3R: Matching And Stereo 3D Re- construction[C]//Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat- tern Recognition (CVPR). 2024: 20436-20446. 23
Appendices  Appendix A: Derivation of Rotational Invariance for Spherical Harmonics  3D Gaussian Splatting uses Spherical Harmonics (SH) functions to represent direction- dependent colors. The SH basis function   Y   m l   ( θ   ,   φ   )   of degree   l   satisfies rotational invariance:  Z  S 2   Y   m l   ( R ω ) Y   m ′  l   ( ω ) d ω   =   δ ll ′   δ mm ′  Where   R   ∈   SO ( 3 )   is the rotation matrix, and   ω   = ( θ   ,   φ   )   are spherical coordinates. For the SH coefficients   c l   = [ c − l l   , . . . ,   c l l   ]   of degree   l , the rotational transformation is:  c ′  l   =   D l   ( R ) c l  Where   D l   ( R )   is the Wigner D-matrix, which can be efficiently computed through recursive formulas. In the implementation of this paper, SH of degrees 0-3 (a total of 16 coefficients) are used to represent colors, balancing representational capacity and computational efficiency.  Appendix B: Detailed Information of Experimental Dataset  B.1 Complete List of 15 Test Prompts  Based on the actual experimental results from   results.json , the 15 test prompts used in this study are:  Simple Scenes (5 prompts):  1. "A cozy bedroom with a bed and nightstand" 2. "A minimalist living room with a sofa" 3. "A small bathroom with white tiles" 4. "A simple kitchen with wooden cabinets" 5. "A quiet study room with a desk"  Medium Scenes (5 prompts):  [6] "A modern kitchen with marble countertops and stainless steel appliances" [7] "A comfortable living room with a fireplace and wooden furniture" [8] "A spacious bedroom with large windows and elegant curtains" [9] "A contemporary bathroom with a glass shower and modern fixtures" [10] "A home office with bookshelves and a computer desk"  Complex Scenes (5 prompts):  [11] "A luxurious master bedroom with a king-size bed, chandelier, and floor-to-ceiling win- dows" [12] "An open-plan kitchen and dining area with an island, pendant lights, and modern appli- ances" 24
[13] "A grand living room with high ceilings, a fireplace, large sofas, and decorative artwork" [14] "A spa-like bathroom with a freestanding bathtub, double vanity, and ambient lighting" [15] "A professional home office with built-in shelving, a large desk, and ergonomic seating"  B.2 Prompt Complexity Classification Criteria  Table 5: Prompt Complexity Classification Criteria  Complexity Level   Characteristics   Number of Objects   Spatial Structure   Decorative   Ele- ments Simple   Single   furniture   item, basic spatial structure 1-2   Single   room,   simple layout Minimal (0-1)  Medium   Multiple   furniture items, moderate spatial complexity 3-5   Single room, moderate layout Some (2-3)  Complex   Rich spatial hierarchy, multiple   functional zones 6+   Multi-zone,   complex layout Abundant (4+)  B.3 Experimental Design  •   Total Experiments:   15 prompts   ×   2 variants = 30 experiments •   Variants: – Variant 124:   Stage 1 (MVDiffusion)   →   Stage 2 (DUSt3R)   →   Stage 4 (3D-GS), using 8 sparse views  – Variant 1234:   Complete pipeline with Stage 3 (ViewCrafter), using 24 dense views •   Random Seed:   42 (for reproducibility) •   Success Rate:   100% (30/30 experiments completed successfully) •   Hardware:   NVIDIA RTX 5090 (32GB VRAM) •   Software:   Python 3.10, PyTorch 2.7.1, CUDA 12.8  Appendix C: Hyperparameter Configuration Tables  C.1 Stage 1 (MVDiffusion) Parameters  Table 6: Stage 1 (MVDiffusion) Parameters  Parameter   Value   Description   Source  num_views   8   Number of panoramic views   configs/default.yaml resolution   512   Output image resolution (pix- els)  configs/default.yaml fov   90 ◦   Field of view   configs/default.yaml guidance_scale   9.0   Classifier-free   guidance weight  configs/default.yaml diff_timesteps   50   DDPM sampling steps   configs/default.yaml  Azimuth angles ( θ   )   0 ◦ , 45 ◦ , 90 ◦ , 135 ◦ , 180 ◦ , 225 ◦ , 270 ◦ , 315 ◦   Uniform spherical sampling   text2gs/stages/mvdiffusion.py  Elevation angle ( φ   )   0 ◦   Horizontal plane   text2gs/stages/mvdiffusion.py  Checkpoint   pano.ckpt   Pre-trained   MVDiffusion weights  configs/default.yaml  25
Camera Intrinsic Calculation:  f   =   0 . 5   ×   resolution /   tan ( 0 . 5   ×   fov / 180   ×   π ) =   0 . 5   ×   512 /   tan ( 45 ◦ ) =   256 . 0  cx   =   cy   = ( resolution   −   1 ) / 2   =   255 . 5  K   =     256 . 0   0 . 0   255 . 5 0 . 0   256 . 0   255 . 5 0 . 0   0 . 0   1 . 0     C.2 Stage 2 (DUSt3R) Parameters  Table 7: Stage 2 (DUSt3R) Parameters  Parameter   Value   Description   Source  batch_size   1   Inference batch size   configs/default.yaml niter   300   Global alignment iterations   configs/default.yaml lr   0.01   Learning rate for pose opti- mization  configs/default.yaml schedule   "linear"   Learning rate schedule   configs/default.yaml min_conf_thr   3.0   Confidence   threshold   for point filtering  configs/default.yaml  Scene graph   "complete"   All pairwise connections   text2gs/stages/pointcloud.py  Symmetrize pairs   True   Bidirectional image pairs   text2gs/stages/pointcloud.py  Initialization   "mst"   Minimum Spanning Tree   text2gs/stages/pointcloud.py  Optimizer   Levenberg-Marquardt   Non-linear least squares   DUSt3R default Checkpoint   DUSt3R_ViTLarge_BaseDecoder_512_dpt.pth   Pre-trained weights   configs/default.yaml  C.3 Stage 3 (ViewCrafter) Parameters  Table 8: Stage 3 (ViewCrafter) Parameters  Parameter   Value   Description   Source  video_length   25   Frames per video clip   configs/default.yaml ddim_steps   50   DDIM sampling steps   configs/default.yaml guidance_scale   7.5   Classifier-free   guidance weight  configs/default.yaml min_conf_thr   3.0   Confidence threshold for ren- dering  configs/default.yaml bg_trd   0.2   Background threshold ratio   configs/default.yaml use_all_frames   False   Use all generated frames (de- fault: sampling)  configs/default.yaml num_sampled_frames   16   Number   of   interpolated frames to sample  configs/default.yaml  Total views (M)   24   8 keyframes + 16 sampled frames Calculated Point cloud rendering radius   0.01   PyTorch3D rasterizer param- eter  text2gs/stages/viewcrafter.py  Points per pixel (K)   10   Rendering quality control   text2gs/stages/viewcrafter.py  Checkpoint   model_sparse.ckpt   ViewCrafter_25_sparse weights  configs/default.yaml  Sampling Strategy:  •   Keyframe Preservation:   8 original views from Stage 1 are preserved •   Interpolation:   7 video clips generated (between adjacent keyframes) •   Sampling:   Uniformly sample 16 frames from interpolated views •   Total:   8 (keyframes) + 16 (sampled) = 24 views for Stage 4 26
Table 9: Stage 4 (3D Gaussian Splatting) Parameters  Parameter   Value   Description   Source  iterations   7,000   Training   iterations   (Variant 1234) Experimental results  iterations   7,000   Training   iterations   (Variant 124) Experimental results  opacity_reset_interval   100,000   Disabled   (prevent   structural holes)  configs/default.yaml max_init_points   500,000   Maximum initial point cloud size  text2gs/stages/gaussian.py  Learning rate (position)   1 . 6   ×   10 − 4   Gaussian center   μ   3D-GS default Learning rate (SH)   2 . 5   ×   10 − 3   Spherical Harmonics coeffi- cients 3D-GS default Learning rate (opacity)   5   ×   10 − 2   Opacity   α   3D-GS default Learning rate (scaling)   5   ×   10 − 3   Scale parameter   3D-GS default Learning rate (rotation)   1   ×   10 − 3   Rotation parameter   3D-GS default Densification interval   100   Gradient-based densification   3D-GS default Densification gradient threshold   2   ×   10 − 4   Splitting/cloning trigger   3D-GS default Loss weight ( λ   )   0.2   D-SSIM weight in combined loss 3D-GS default SH degree   3   Total 16 coefficients (degrees 0-3) 3D-GS default  C.4 Stage 4 (3D Gaussian Splatting) Parameters Loss Function:  L   = ( 1   −   λ   )   ×   L 1   +   λ   ×   L D-SSIM  =   0 . 8   ×   L 1   +   0 . 2   ×   L D-SSIM  Training Time:  •   Variant 124 (8 views):   ∼ 3.19 minutes average •   Variant 1234 (24 views):   ∼ 11.49 minutes average (includes Stage 3)  Appendix D: Detailed Statistical Test Results  D.1 Paired t-test Results for Rendered Images (n=15)  All statistical tests were performed using   scipy.stats.ttest_rel   with two-tailed tests at  α   =   0 . 05 significance level.  D.1.1 Multi-view Consistency (MVC) - CLIP ViT-B/32  Metric: Mean cosine similarity between adjacent views Higher is better, range: [0, 1] Variant 124:   Mean = 0.9382, SD = 0.0105 Variant 1234: Mean = 0.9401, SD = 0.0109 Paired Differences: Mean difference = -0.0019 SD of differences = 0.0148 t-test Results: t-statistic = -0.4967  27
p-value = 0.6271 (two-tailed) df = 14 Effect Size: Cohen's d = -0.170 (negligible) 95% Confidence Interval for difference: [-0.0095, 0.0057] Conclusion: No significant difference (p > 0.05) Null hypothesis: mu_124 = mu_1234 cannot be rejected  D.1.2 Text-Image Alignment (TIA) - CLIP Text-Image Similarity  Metric: Mean cosine similarity between text and image embeddings Higher is better, range: [0, 1] Variant 124:   Mean = 0.3132, SD = 0.0173 Variant 1234: Mean = 0.3025, SD = 0.0204 Paired Differences: Mean difference = 0.0107 SD of differences = 0.0098 t-test Results: t-statistic = 4.2319 p-value = 0.0008 (two-tailed) df = 14 Effect Size: Cohen's d = 0.546 (medium) 95% Confidence Interval for difference: [0.0048, 0.0166] Conclusion: Variant 124 significantly better (p < 0.001) Reject null hypothesis: mu_124 > mu_1234  D.1.3 Rendering Quality - Combined Sharpness & Contrast  Metric: 0.6 x Sharpness_norm + 0.4 x Contrast_norm Higher is better, range: [0, 1] Variant 124:   Mean = 0.4878, SD = 0.0575 Variant 1234: Mean = 0.4245, SD = 0.0576 Paired Differences: Mean difference = 0.0633  28
SD of differences = 0.0851 t-test Results: t-statistic = 2.8797 p-value = 0.0121 (two-tailed) df = 14 Effect Size: Cohen's d = 1.063 (large) 95% Confidence Interval for difference: [0.0159, 0.1107] Conclusion: Variant 124 significantly better (p < 0.05) Reject null hypothesis: mu_124 > mu_1234  D.1.4 LPIPS Consistency - Perceptual Distance (AlexNet)  Metric: Mean LPIPS distance between adjacent views Lower is better, range: [0, 1] Variant 124:   Mean = 0.6604, SD = 0.0509 Variant 1234: Mean = 0.5524, SD = 0.0296 Paired Differences: Mean difference = 0.1080 SD of differences = 0.0532 t-test Results: t-statistic = 7.8572 p-value = 1.69e-6 (two-tailed) df = 14 Effect Size: Cohen's d = 2.507 (large) 95% Confidence Interval for difference: [0.0798, 0.1362] Conclusion: Variant 1234 significantly better (p < 0.001) Reject null hypothesis: mu_124 > mu_1234 (Lower LPIPS indicates better perceptual consistency)  Appendix E: System Implementation Details  E.1 Software Dependencies (requirements.txt)  # Core Framework  29
torch==2.7.1+cu128 torchvision==0.22.1+cu128 numpy==2.0.0 scipy==1.15.3 # Diffusion Models diffusers==0.16.1 transformers==4.30.2 xformers==0.0.30 open-clip-torch==2.17.1 timm==0.9.12 # Deep Learning pytorch-lightning==1.9.3 accelerate==0.21.0 # Image/Video Processing opencv-python==4.12.0.88 Pillow==10.4.0 imageio==2.37.2 imageio-ffmpeg==0.6.0 av==16.0.1 decord==0.6.0 # 3D Processing trimesh==4.10.1 roma==1.5.4 kornia==0.8.2 plyfile==1.1.3 # Evaluation Metrics lpips==0.1.4 pytorch-fid==0.3.0 open3d==0.18.0 # Utilities einops==0.6.1 omegaconf==2.3.0 pyyaml==6.0.3 tqdm==4.67.1  E.2 Hardware Requirements E.3 Directory Structure  Text2GS/ |-- text2gs/   # Core pipeline |   |-- pipeline.py   # Main orchestration |   |-- run.py   # Entry point |   |-- stages/  30
Table 10: Hardware Requirements  Component   Minimum   Recommended   Used in This Study GPU   NVIDIA   RTX   3090 (24GB) NVIDIA   RTX   4090 (24GB)  NVIDIA   RTX   5090 (32GB) CPU   8-core processor   16-core processor   Multi-core (8+ cores)  RAM   32GB   64GB   32GB+  Storage   50GB free   100GB free   50GB+  OS   Ubuntu 20.04+   Ubuntu 22.04   Ubuntu 22.04 LTS  CUDA   11.8+   12.1+   CUDA 12.8 cuDNN   8.6+   8.9+   cuDNN 9.5.1  |   |   |-- __init__.py |   |   |-- base.py   # Base stage class |   |   |-- mvdiffusion.py   # Stage 1 |   |   |-- pointcloud.py   # Stage 2 |   |   |-- viewcrafter.py   # Stage 3 |   |   +-- gaussian.py   # Stage 4 |   +-- utils/ |   |-- __init__.py |   |-- camera.py   # Camera utilities |   |-- render.py   # Rendering utilities |   +-- io.py   # I/O operations |-- evaluation/ |   |-- __init__.py |   +-- metrics.py   # Evaluation metrics |-- experiments/ |   |-- run_progressive_comparison.py |   +-- analyze_results.py |-- configs/ |   |-- default.yaml   # Default configuration |   +-- full_frames.yaml   # Full frames mode |-- extern/   # External dependencies |   |-- MVDiffusion/   # Git submodule |   |-- ViewCrafter/   # Git submodule |   |-- dust3r/   # Git submodule |   +-- gaussian-splatting/   # Git submodule |-- checkpoints/   # Pre-trained models |   |-- mvdiffusion/ |   |   +-- pano.ckpt |   |-- viewcrafter/ |   |   +-- model_sparse.ckpt |   +-- dust3r/ |   +-- DUSt3R_ViTLarge_BaseDecoder_512_dpt.pth |-- run_stage124.py   # Run Variant 124 |-- run_full_frames.py   # Run with all frames |-- requirements.txt +-- README.md  31
E.4 Memory Optimization Techniques  Table 11: Memory Optimization Techniques  Technique   Implementation   Memory Saved   Location Model Unloading   Unload   models   be- tween stages  ∼ 5-8GB   pipeline.py:_unload_stage()  Point Cloud Downsampled   Limit to 500K points   ∼ 2-3GB   stages/gaussian.py  Gradient Checkpointing   Enabled   in   diffusion models  ∼ 3-4GB   Diffusion config  Mixed Precision (FP16)   3D-GS training   ∼ 30% VRAM   3D-GS default  Batch Processing   Sequential   view   pro- cessing Variable   stages/viewcrafter.py  Peak Memory Usage:  •   Without optimization:   ∼ 23.5GB •   With optimization:   ∼ 18.2GB •   Reduction:   ∼ 5.3GB (22.6%) 32
